Halina W. is back on Tempelhof Field for the first time since 1945. She has travelled from the Polish city of Łódź together with her son.
In March 1945, the Nazis put her to work in Tempelhof Field as a forced labourer.
Around 3000 people were forced to work here during the Third Reich.
This place is very busy.
That’s true.
A lot of people.
They all do whatever they want.
There are bins here and they
are eating next to the bins.
I find that kind of inappropriate.
I’m eager to see what the Germans
are going to do with the refugees.
Do you think they have residence permits already?
It looks as if they
have been here for a while.
As if they are settled here.
I admire Chancellor Merkel.
Because she took in the most refugees.
She is very courageous.
And she didn’t change
her decision.
Even though she was criticised strongly for it.
She has a place in my heart, Mrs. Merkel.
You love everybody anyway.
This is a free society now.
When we were clearing the rubble here
there were prisoners of war in their uniforms everywhere,
Frenchmen and Italians.
I came and I
followed the orders.
I had a pickaxe
and I cleared the rubble.
I wasn’t even 15 years of age.
The other girls
who were brought here with me from Velten Camp
were spread all over the field.
I had wooden shoes that were open at the back.
We weren’t dressed for the cold or for this kind of work.
We always wanted to stay together to warm each other.
The orders were: Work! Don’t do that!
Look here! Look away!
We had to obey and be quiet.
The airports were being bombarded
with the biggest bombs.
They made huge, huge craters in the ground.
Day and night the bombs were falling.
Day and night.
We hid in the craters
when there was an air-raid alarm.
We waited for the attack to pass
and then we went back to work.
If I had someone to support my other arm, that would be helpful.
Hold on to me.
Our mother always spared us children this story.
We knew that she was a forced labourer.
I think it is good
that she didn’t think of it constantly
and that she didn’t pass this on to us.
She didn’t burden our childhood
with stories from the war.
People are free here.
So many nationalities coming together and having fun.
That’s the way it should be.
My youth was lost...
We were just waiting
for the work day to end.
For the order
to go home.